---
title: The worst video game ever
index: 21
description: Discover the story of a video game so awful that its unsold copies had to be buried in the middle of the desert.
date: '2021-07-23'
articleUrl: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.T._the_Extra-Terrestrial_(video_game)
tags:
  - technology
  - history
---

In the 1980s, rumors emerged that video game industry behemoth Atari had quietly buried - as if in shame - huge quantities of unsold copies of a video game in the New Mexico desert. This wasn't just any video game, either. It was the game that sealed Atari's fate and threatened the future of the entire industry. It was a confusing, rage-inducing, ugly mess. In a word, it was a disaster.

That game was *E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial*, a cash-grab title for the Atari 2600 created in the hopes of riding the tidal wave of popularity that was generated by the film of the same name. It failed in every possible way: the gameplay was poorly designed, it was harshly panned by critics, and it was a complete commercial failure. For these reasons, it's widely considered the single worst video game of all time. At least it won at something.

After the huge success of the *E.T.* film, the potential for a similarly successful video game had Atari executives drooling. By the film's release in June 1982, Atari was already floundering - if they were going to survive, they needed a hit, and this was their chance. But time was running out; only months remained before the holiday season, before which millions of cartridges would need to be manufactured and distributed in preparation for Christmas.

While it's true that video games of this era were simpler than what we have today, they still required several months of development and testing time. But when developer Howard Scott Warshaw was approached (at Steven Spielberg's request, no less) to create an *E.T.* game in just five weeks, he saw the tight deadline as a challenge to be conquered. Warshaw was somehow not deterred by the expectation to live up to the movie's success, nor the pressure to rescue Atari from impending doom. His ambition is certainly admirable. Given the ludicrously unrealistic time limitations (which, to make matters worse, also caused playtesting to be scrapped), Warshaw can't really be blamed for creating a total flop.

In anticipation of a smash hit, retailers ordered millions of copies of *E.T.* to fill their shelves. Things weren't looking too bad at first, with a fairly impressive 2.6 million copies sold by the end of 1982. But in reality, it wasn't going well. Critical reception was poor, sales figures didn't meet expectations, and copies of the game came flooding back as they were returned to retailers by the parents of disappointed children. Atari found themselves left with millions of unsold cartridges and a massive hole where their money used to be.

Complaints about *E.T.*'s gameplay were plentiful. The game was criticized for its story (or lack thereof), its unappealing visual style, and for just generally being really boring. But the most common grievance was about the holes. Dear Lord, the holes. At seemingly every turn, poor E.T. will fall, often inexplicably, into deep pits, most of which are totally empty and serve no purpose but to slow you down and inflict suffering. Worse yet, a flaw in the game's design means that it's all too easy to escape a hole only to immediately fall back in. Just watching gameplay is infuriating; it's no mystery why the unfortunate souls who actually got their hands on the game were driven to insanity.

In its own way, the *E.T.* game became an important landmark in the history of video games. And if you were wondering about those rumors about copies of the game being secretly buried in the desert, they turned out to be true. A 2014 excavation unearthed hundreds of thousands of old cartridges in the rumored New Mexico landfill, some of which were indeed copies of *E.T.* It seems about right that a game all about falling into holes would decades later be found in one.

Today's article contains plenty of interesting details about the disastrous *E.T.* video game, including more about its development, reception and legacy. If you feel like falling into this rabbit hole, follow the link below.